Adding output schemas (#32)
qir-alliance/qir-spec: specification/under_development/output_schemas/Labeled_And_Async.md

> # Labeled Format for Asynchronous Output Generation

Reviewer: Nitpick: throughout the document labels and tags are used interchangeably, maybe we could consistently just use labels?

> The labeled format for asynchronous output generation is the same as the [ordered format][] with the following changes:

Reviewer: An additional paragraph describing the role of the labels for asynchronous output generation would make it more clear to the reader why labels are needed.

We could also include a recommendation that the consumer of the output format should be the one setting the labels and the reasoning behind it would be a nice addition.

```

Inserts a marker in the generated output that indicates the start of an array and how many array elements it has. It produces output records of exactly `"OUTPUT\tARRAY\tn\ttag"` where `n` is the string representation of the integer value, such as `"OUTPUT\tARRAY\t4\ttag"`.  The second parameter defines a string label for the result value which is included in the output (`tag`).

## Examples

### Basic Single Item Output 

The QIR program would include a single call to the runtime function matching the type of the return value: 

```llvm
@0 = internal constant [3 x i8] c"0_i\00"
call void @__quantum__rt__integer_record_output(i64 %5, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([3 x i8], [3 x i8]* @0, i32 0, i32 0))
ret void
```

Such that the provider output for `3` shots would be: 

```log
START
METADATA\tmetadata1_name_only
METADATA\tmetadata2_name\tmetadata2_value
OUTPUT\tINT\t42\t0_i
END\t0
START
METADATA\tmetadata1_name_only
METADATA\tmetadata2_name\tmetadata2_value
OUTPUT\tINT\t41\t0_i
END\t0
START
METADATA\tmetadata1_name_only
METADATA\tmetadata2_name\tmetadata2_value
OUTPUT\tINT\t42\t0_i 
END\t0
```

## Measurement Result Array Output 

> For an array of measurement results (or classical register), the QIR program would include array start and end calls, with intervening result record calls (shown with static result allocation transformations performed): 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an array of measurement results (or classical values), the QIR program would include an array output recording call, where the first argument indicates the length of the array, followed by the corresponding output recording calls that represent each one of the array items:
```

call void @__quantum__rt__array_record_output(i64 2, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([5 x i8], [5 x i8]* @2, i32 0, i32 0))
call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* nonnull inttoptr (i64 0 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([7 x i8], [7 x i8]* @3, i32 0, i32 0))
call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* nonnull inttoptr (i64 0 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([7 x i8], [7 x i8]* @4, i32 0, i32 0))
ret void
```

This would produce provider output for `3` shots of the form: 

```log
START
METADATA\tmetadata1_name_only
METADATA\tmetadata2_name\tmetadata2_value
OUTPUT\tARRAY\t1\t0_0a
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t0\t1_0a0r
OUTPUT\tARRAY\t2\t2_1a
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t1\t3_1a0r
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t1\t4_1a1r
END\t0
START
METADATA\tmetadata1_name_only
METADATA\tmetadata2_name\tmetadata2_value
OUTPUT\tARRAY\t1\t0_0a
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t1\t1_0a0r
OUTPUT\tARRAY\t2\t2_1a
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t1\t3_1a0r
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t1\t4_1a1r
END\t0
START
METADATA\tmetadata1_name_only
METADATA\tmetadata2_name\tmetadata2_value
OUTPUT\tARRAY\t1\t0_0a
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t0\t1_0a0r
OUTPUT\tARRAY\t2\t2_1a
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t1\t3_1a0r
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t1\t4_1a1r
END\t0
```

## Tuple Output 

> Recording tuple output works much the same way as array output, but with a different delimiter character in the final processed output. So, a QIR program that returns a tuple of a measurement result and calculated double value would end with: 

Reviewer: Mentioning the different delimiter character in the final processed output might be getting too much into the details of the labeling schema.

```llvm
@0 = internal constant [5 x i8] c"0_0a\00"
@1 = internal constant [7 x i8] c"1_0a0r\00"
@2 = internal constant [5 x i8] c"2_1a\00"
@3 = internal constant [7 x i8] c"3_1a0r\00"
@4 = internal constant [7 x i8] c"4_1a1r\00"
call void @__quantum__rt__array_record_output(i64 1, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([5 x i8], [5 x i8]* @0, i32 0, i32 0))
call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* %2, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([7 x i8], [7 x i8]* @1, i32 0, i32 0))
call void @__quantum__rt__array_record_output(i64 2, i8* getelementptr inbounds ([5 x i8], [5 x i8]* @2, i32 0, i32 0))
call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* nonnull inttoptr (i64 0 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([7 x i8], [7 x i8]* @3, i32 0, i32 0))
call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* nonnull inttoptr (i64 0 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([7 x i8], [7 x i8]* @4, i32 0, i32 0))
ret void
```

This would produce provider output for `3` shots of the form: 

```log
START
METADATA\tmetadata1_name_only
METADATA\tmetadata2_name\tmetadata2_value

> OUTPUT\tARRAY\t1\t0_0a

Reviewer 2: Does `t0_0a` have to come before `t2_2a` in the output?

Author: @peter-campora I can clarify at the top of the file, for the async and labeled, order is not important, but it puts the responsibility on the party doing the labeling to be able to reconstruct the output structure based on their defined scheme. The usage of `t0_0a` and `t2_2a` are just examples  of a labeling scheme.

# Labeled Format for Asynchronous Output Generation

The labeled format for asynchronous output generation is the same as the [ordered format][] with the following changes:
  - `OUTPUT` records `TUPLE`, `ARRAY`, `RESULT`, `INT`, `BOOL`, and `DOUBLE` types have a fourth field indicating the label of the record.

> Labels are needed for reconstruction of asynchronous/parallel computation output and are assigned by the front-end QIR generator. Order is not important for the `OUTPUT` entries within a `START`/`END` block; however, the responsibility of reconstructing the output based on the defined labeling scheme belongs to the party permforming the output labeling. The usage of `t0_0a` and `t2_2a` (and other values) are examples of a labeling scheme, and are only used as an example.

Author: @qci-amos Would this ABNF grammar work for a definition? Defining an ABNF for the entire format would be a lot of work, but this covers the characters allowed, end of lines, etc. The details of the record fields are covered in the rest of the doc.

```
file = record *(EOL record) [EOL]

record = field *(TAB field)

field = (escaped / non-escaped)

escaped = DQUOTE *(TEXTDATA / TAB) DQUOTE

non-escaped = *TEXTDATA

TAB = %x09

LF = %x0A

CR = %x0D

CRLF = CR LF

EOL = (LF / CR / CRLF)

DQUOTE = %x22

TEXTDATA = %x20-21 / %x23-7E
```

> Labels are needed for reconstruction of asynchronous/parallel computation output and are assigned by the front-end QIR generator. Order is not important for the `OUTPUT` entries within a `START`/`END` block; however, the responsibility of reconstructing the output based on the defined labeling scheme belongs to the party permforming the output labeling. The usage of `t0_0a` and `t2_2a` (and other values) are examples of a labeling scheme, and are only used as an example.

Author: I addressed this in the ABNFs.

Consumers of the QIR need to map the associated labeles for each recording call to its output entry label.

Example log for a single shot:

```log
START

> METADATA\tmetadata1_name_only

Reviewer 2: A comment describing example meta data for programs using the labeled and async output format could be useful to get a feel for what these stub rows in the log for this single shot could actually look like in practice.

METADATA\tmetadata2_name\tmetadata2_value
METADATA\tmetadata3_name\tmetadata3_value
OUTPUT\tTUPLE\t2\t0_t
OUTPUT\tARRAY\t4\t1_t0a
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t0\t2_t0a0r
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t0\t3_t0a1r
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t0\t4_t0a2r
OUTPUT\tRESULT\t0\t5_t0a3r
OUTPUT\tTUPLE\t3\t6_t1t
OUTPUT\tBOOL\ttrue\t7_t1t0b
OUTPUT\tINT\t42\t8_t1t1i
OUTPUT\tDOUBLE\t3.1415\t9_t1t2d
END\t0
```

## Declared Runtime Functions 

Each of these runtime functions are meant as signifiers to the provider as to how raw device results should be collected into the common output format. For simulation or future environments with full runtime support, these functions can be linked to implementations that directly perform the recording of output to the relevant stream. Each of these functions follow the naming pattern `__quantum__rt__*_record_output` where the initial part indicates the type of output to be recorded.  

### Primitive Result Records 

```llvm
void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result*, i8*)
```

> Adds a measurement result to the generated output. It produces output records of exactly `"OUTPUT\tRESULT\t0\tlabel"` or `"OUTPUT\tRESULT\t1\tlabel"`. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value which is included in the output (`label`).

Reviewer 3: While I understand why the method signatures are specialized, I wouldn't mind a sentence explaining why RESULT and BOOL _outputs_ aren't emitted as INT.

Author: Addressed in the notes that were just pushed.

```llvm
void @__quantum__rt__bool_record_output(i1, i8*)
```

produces output records of exactly `"OUTPUT\tBOOL\tfalse\tlabel"` or `"OUTPUT\tBOOL\ttrue\tlabel"`.  The second parameter defines a string label for the result value which is included in the output  (`label`).

```llvm
void @__quantum__rt__integer_record_output(i64, i8*)
```

produces output records of the format `"OUTPUT\tINT\tn\tlabel"` where `n` is the string representation of the integer value, such as `"OUTPUT\tINT\t42\tlabel"`.  The second parameter defines a string label for the result value which is included in the output (`label`).

```llvm
void @__quantum__rt__double_record_output(double, i8*) 
```

> produces output records of the format `"OUTPUT\tDOUBLE\td\tlabel"` where `d` is the string representation of the double value, such as `"OUTPUT\tDOUBLE\t3.14159\tlabel"`. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value which is included in the output (`label`).

Author: The `int`, `double`, and `bool` recording calls aren't fully fleshed out as part of the spec but provided as something we can work toward adding or dropping (as the base profile doesn't define the call, but we can talk about adding them). For doubles I was thinking something parsable from multiple languages. This is a rough idea, but perhaps something like:
```txt
Float  ::= Sign? ( 'inf' | 'infinity' | 'nan' | Number )
Number ::= ( Digit+ | Digit+ '.' Digit+ | Digit* '.' Digit+ ) Exp?
Exp    ::= 'e' Sign? Digit+
Sign   ::= [+-]
Digit  ::= [0-9]
```

> produces output records of the format `"OUTPUT\tDOUBLE\td\tlabel"` where `d` is the string representation of the double value, such as `"OUTPUT\tDOUBLE\t3.14159\tlabel"`. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value which is included in the output (`label`).

Author: I added a full ABNF for the formats as part of the PR. Let me know if that is clear enough.

### Tuple Type Records

```llvm
void @__quantum__rt__tuple_record_output(i64, i8*)
```

Inserts a marker in the generated output that indicates the start of a tuple and how many tuple elements it has. It produces output records of exactly `"OUTPUT\tTUPLE\tn\tlabel"` where `n` is the string representation of the integer value, such as `"OUTPUT\tTUPLE\t4\tlabel"`.  The second parameter defines a string label for the result value which is included in the output (`label`).

### Array Type Records

```llvm
void @__quantum__rt__array_record_output(i64, i8*)
```

> Inserts a marker in the generated output that indicates the start of an array and how many array elements it has. It produces output records of exactly `"OUTPUT\tARRAY\tn\tlabel"` where `n` is the string representation of the integer value, such as `"OUTPUT\tARRAY\t4\tlabel"`.  The second parameter defines a string label for the result value which is included in the output (`label`).

Author: @qci-amos Added notes in the notes doc.
